# Some Familar Data Structues in a Functional Setting

* Sometimes all we want is the minimum element of a collection
  (we might want the maximum, and to achieve so we just need to flip
  the `<` relation.)
* **priority queue** or **heap** is the name of data structures that
  have this support.
* **heap-ordered** trees: a tree whose element at each node
  is no larger than the elements at its children.
* Note that **heap-ordered** does not say anything about the relation between
  left and right children of a tree, only that the minimum one should be the
  parent of both. So this ordering is some sense "more loose" than a binary search tree.
* Under this ordering, the minimum element in a tree is always at the root.

## Leftist Heap (3.1)

* heap-ordered binary trees
* satisfies **leftist property**
* **leftist property**: the rank of any left child is at least
  as large as the rank of its right sibling
* The **rank** of a node is defined to be the length of its **right spine**.
  (an empty node has rank of 0)
* the **right spine** of a node is the rightmost path (always taking the right path)
  from this node to an empty node.

Notes:

* the conclusion of exercise 3.1 says that in a leftist tree,
  the right spine of the root is always "small".
* the basic operation for a leftist tree is `merge`, which
  only walks through right spine of some nodes, which
  bounds the time complexity to $O(\log(n))$
* while the empty node has rank 0, a singleton tree has rank 1 (see `insert` function in book).
  So if a node is newly inserted to a right tree while left tree is empty,
  this node will be moved to the left tree in order to keep the leftist property.

## Binomial Heap (3.2)

Primitive object: binomial tree

* A binomial tree of rank 0 is a singleton node
* A binomial tree of rank $r+1$ is formed by linking two binomial trees of rank $r$,
  making one tree the leftmost child of the other.

Alternative definition:

* A binomial tree of rank 0 is a singleton node
* A binomial tree of rank $r$ is a node with $r$ children $t_1 \ldots t_r$,
  where each $t_i$ is a binomial tree of rank $r-i$.

A binomial heap is a collection of heap-ordered binomial trees in which no two trees
have the same rank.

Notes:

* the definition implies that a binomial tree of rank $r$
  should have exactly $2^r$ nodes in it
* the trees in a binomial heap of size $n$ correspond exactly to the ones in the
  binary representation of $n$.
* merging two binomial trees works the same way as adding 2 numbers under binary representation:
  we first align bits from lowest to highest one, for each bit, if there are at most one bit at that position,
  then that bit is simply placed there. otherwise we have 2 bits in the same position, which means
  "linking" them together and carry the result to the next bit.

## Red-Black Trees (3.3)

A red-black tree is a binary search tree that keeps the tree approximately balanced.

In the book, a red-black tree has the following properties:

* No red node has a red child
* Every path from the root to an empty node contains the same number of black nodes.

(these 2 properties are called "balance invariants" in the book)

In addition to this, other books might state few more properties:

* Every node is colored either red or black
* Root node is black (if root node red, we can turn it into black without violating
  any invariant, so the root color doesn't really matter)

Notes:

* My intuition about red-black trees: consider a red-black tree in which all nodes are black,
  this tree must be a complete and full binary tree because of the constraint of black depth.
  Now we can insert red nodes to make the tree looks unbalanced. But red nodes cannot have red children,
  so the total amount of red nodes allowed to be inserted in this red-black tree is somehow bounded.
  (by "insert" I mean visually adding some on the path from root to null, not in a sense of inserting into
  a binary search tree)
