# Lazy Evaluation

- Evaluation of a given expression is suspeneded (not fully evaluated)
- When a suspended expression is evaluated, it's result is memoized (stored) so
  any future evaluation of it returns immediately when the stored value.

`$` notation in book:

- the scope of it extends as far to the right as possible. (e.g. `$f x` means `$(f x)`, not `$(f) x`)
- to get the value back we need to pattern matching against it (e.g. `force ($x) = x`)
- sometimes the strictness is not desired. for example: `plus ($m,$n) = $m+n` forces `m` and `n` before `+` is called.
  to delaying the forcing, we can do: `plus (x,y) = $case (x,y) of ($m,$n) -> m+n`.
  a shorthand of this is: `lazy plus ($m,$n) = $m+n` (think about Haskell's lazy pattern!)

Streams (also known as lazy lists):

- similar to ordinary lists
- every cell (element) is systematically suspended

**monolithic**: once begin by forcing the suspeneded list, they run to completion.

Notes:

- so we have to be more specific about what is suspended:

    - If we have a whole suspended list of some type and when we need to force this value,
      the whole list will be fully computed.
    - If we just suspend list cells, then the "skeleton" of the list (everything except list
      elements) could be computed, leaving cells suspended.
    - Like Haskell's `[a]` type, which has 2 constructors: `[]` and `:`, we have yet another
      kind of suspension: the both element of `:` is suspeneded by default.
      To be more specific, when we construct a list using `a:b`, first we will have the whole
      computation suspended. Then later on if we want to see elements of this list, the list
      "skeleton" (e.g. `_:_`) is forced to see if the value is in right shape. then by pattern
      matching we can retrieve the head element or rest of the list. Again the retrieved value
      will be suspended until we want to do something regarding the value of it.

- not sure whether this is true, but it seems Haskell and standard ML (as one mentioned in the book)
  is using 2 different ways of controlling suspended computations.

    - in standard ML we might have `$` notation or something alike, which makes expressing lazy evaluation explicit.
    - The lazy evaluation strategy is used in Haskell by default, making it implicit. But we can use `seq` to specify
      a dependency between suspended computations so that forcing one value might cause the computation of other related
      values.
